.TH dada 1 "16 Jul 1995" "Emperor Norton Utilities"
.SH NAME
dada \- front end for the Dada Engine.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dada
[\-Ddefinition [\-Ddefinition ...]] [\-o outfile] [\-s startsym] 
.I filename
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B The Dada Engine
is a programmable system for generating random text from a grammar. 
Grammars are written in the
.B pb
language, which has a syntax vaguely similar to Backus-Naur Format (BNF),
production systems or yacc(1).
.PP
.I dada
is a shell script which serves as the preferred user interface to the Dada
Engine. It is called with the name of a pb script and possibly some options.
When called, it invokes the C preprocessor,
.I cpp(1),
on the script provided and any define options on the command line. The
output of the preprocessor is piped into the pb interpreter,
.I pb(1), along with other arguments.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -D\fIdef\fR
Defines the preprocessor symbol \fIdef\fR.
.TP
.B -D\fIdef=value\fR
Defines the preprocessor symbol \fIdef\fR to be equal to \fIvalue\fR.
.TP
.B -o \fIfilename\fR
Redirects output to the file thus named; if not supplied, output will go to
the standard output.
.TP
.B -r \fIrandomseed\fR
Defines a seed for the random number generator used to select options.
If this is not specified, the random number generator is seeded from the
current system time.
.TP
.B -s \fIstartsym\fR
Defines the 
.I "start symbol,"
the name of the rule which is initially evaluated. If not specified, this
defaults to the first rule in the script.
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
cpp(1), sh(1),
.I The pb Language
.SH AUTHOR
Andrew C. Bulhak <acb@dev.null.org>

