.TH pb 1 "4 Chaos 3162" "Emperor Norton Utilities"
.SH NAME
pb \- recursive random text generation engine
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pb
[\-d] [\-i] [\-r
.I "randomseed"
] [\-s
.I "start symbol"
] [\-v] <\fIfilename\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pb
is a programmable system for generating random text from a grammar. 
Grammars are stored in user-specified text files, in a format similar to
Backus-Naur Format (BNF) or production systems. The language used to define
.I pb
grammars is described in the Texinfo documentation provided.
.PP
.I pb
is invoked as a pipe, and reads its grammar from the standard input.
.PP
If the command line contains the
.B \-d
flag, pb will dump the internal representation of the grammar to the 
standard output.
.PP
If the command line contains the
.B \-i
flag, pb will not evaluate the grammar, but merely read it. This option is
useful with the \-d flag.
.PP
By default, pb seeds its random number generator with the current system time.
An alternative seed (either an integer or a string) may be specified with the
.B \-r
switch.
.PP
By default, pb will evaluate the first rule defined in a grammar; this rule
is referred to as the
.I "start symbol" . 
An alternate start symbol may be specified with the
.B -s
switch.
.PP
The
.B -v
option causes pb to output state information, and is primarily useful for
debugging.
.PP
.SH BUGS
Transformations are still somewhat flaky, and may not always give the desired
results.
.SH COPYING
The author hereby grants permission to use, copy, modify, distribute,
and license this software and its documentation for any purpose, provided
that existing copyright notices are retained in all copies and that this
notice is included verbatim in any distributions. No written agreement,
license, or royalty fee is required for any of the authorized uses.
Modifications to this software may be copyrighted by their authors
and need not follow the licensing terms described here, provided that
the new terms are clearly indicated on the first page of each file where
they apply.
.PP
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR DISTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY
FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, ITS DOCUMENTATION, OR ANY
DERIVATIVES THEREOF, EVEN IF THE AUTHORS HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.SH AUTHOR
Andrew C. Bulhak <acb@dev.null.org>
